drafting (#2750)
trpc/trpc: www/blog/2022-11-06-announcing-trpc-10.mdx

---
slug: announcing-trpc-10
title: Announcing tRPC 10
author: Alex / KATT 🐱
author_title: Creator of tRPC
author_url: https://twitter.com/alexdotjs
author_image_url: https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/459267?s=460&v=4
---

## Introduction

> tRPC's mission from day one has been to provide you with an easy way of moving fast and not breaking nothing whilst building full-stack applications.

Author: I dislike this

Reviewer: tRPC's purpose is to provide you with an easy way to rapidly(quickly?) build full stack applications without breaking anything.

maybe that will spark alternatives in your mind

Reviewer 2: Here's my take if it's useful:

tRPC aims to provide the best full stack application by enforcing tight type bindings between backend and frontend - without the codegen, drift between API contracts or time wasted unit testing things that are instead bound with TypeScript contracts.

Today, **we're launching tRPC 10**. It is already used in production and can safely be used for in your next, or current, TypeScript project.

Get up and running with the [example applications](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/awesome-trpc#-starting-points-example-projects-etc) to get a feel of tRPC 10, or see the [guide for migrating from tRPC 9 to tRPC 10](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/migrate-from-v9-to-v10).

## Overview of changes

tRPC 10 is our biggest release ever. This is the first time we have made any fundamental changes to the structure of tRPC, yet these changes unlock new possibilities for cross-functional teams working on cutting-edge applications.

tRPC 10 includes:

- **Massively Improved TypeScript Performance:**
- **Improved API Experience**
  - Calling functions instead of invoking strings
  - CMD+clicking and refactoring from the frontend
  - Easier to infer types
- **Powerful Backend Framework**
  - Reusable middlewares
  - Reusable base procedures

### Massively Improved TypeScript Performance

> TypeScript enables us to do very cool things, but it comes at a cost. Many of the things that we (ab)use in tRPC are excessive on the compiler, and as a result, you might have experienced your IDE slowing down as your application grows.

Reviewer: potential alternative to spark ideas.

```suggestion
TypeScript enables us to do very cool things, but it comes at a cost. Many of the things that we (ab)use in tRPC are excessive on the compiler and, as a result, you may have experienced your editor performance decrease as your application grew
```

author: Alex / KATT 🐱
author_title: Creator of tRPC
author_url: https://twitter.com/alexdotjs
author_image_url: https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/459267?s=460&v=4
---

import { GithubSponsorButton } from '@site/src/components/GithubSponsorButton';

## Introduction

tRPC's mission from day one has been to provide you with an easy way of moving fast and not breaking nothing whilst building full-stack applications.

Since we released our last major version in August 2021, we've gotten over 13,500+ more stars on GitHub, a [Discord-community](https://trpc.io/discord) with over 2,000 members, thousands more applications built using tRPC, a growing ecosystem, and countless community members contributing and providing valuable feedback.

Today, **we're launching tRPC 10**. It is already used in production and can safely be used for in your next, or current, TypeScript project.

Get up and running with the [example applications](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/awesome-trpc#-starting-points-example-projects-etc) to get a feel of tRPC 10, or see the [guide for migrating from tRPC 9 to tRPC 10](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/migrate-from-v9-to-v10).

## Overview of changes

> tRPC 10 is our biggest release ever. This is the first time we have made any fundamental changes to the structure of tRPC, yet these changes unlock new possibilities for cross-functional teams working on cutting-edge applications.

Reviewer 3: I don't know what cross-functional teams means here, maybe there's a better word here? "fast-moving"?

Reviewer 4: Good call, Papa Sachin!

tRPC 10 includes:

- **Massively Improved TypeScript Performance:**
- **Improved API Experience**
  - Calling functions instead of invoking strings
  - CMD+clicking and refactoring from the frontend
  - Easier to infer types
- **Powerful Backend Framework**
  - Reusable middlewares

>   - Reusable base procedures

Reviewer 3: I think these sections should be sorted in order of importance. Yes, the performance win was great but it's not really the core of what v10 was about. The changes you describe here also only make sense to people who have used tRPC v9. Here's the order I would use (from greatest to least importance):
- blurs the lines between your frontend and backend (improved API experience)
  - cmd+click (jump to definition) from frontend queries to the backend functions
- powerful backend framework emphasizing reusability (or composition) so you never have to repeat yourself
- massively improved TypeScript performance

The ones I removed from above aren't easy to grasp through text unless you've already used tRPC v10, in which case they should probably be expanded upon in the individual sections.

Reviewer 2: Might be worth adding an additional second bullet point in the first item: "Fn+F2 style renaming of queries and mutations" right after the with the "cmd+click".

### Massively Improved TypeScript Performance

TypeScript enables us to do very cool things, but it comes at a cost. Many of the things that we (ab)use in tRPC are excessive on the compiler, and as a result, you might have experienced your IDE slowing down as your application grows.

In v10, we've improved this massively by changing our API allows TypeScript to be much faster, especially during incremental compilation, allowing your IDE to remain snappy.

### Improved DX

tRPC 10 embraces TypeScript to its fullest potential to give you an unparalleled DX across the API.

You will notice the following in tRPC 10:

- Jump straight to your backend function from your frontend by just CMD+clicking the path

> - Right click and _"Rename Symbol"_ to rename an input argument or a procedure name across your whole application.

Reviewer 3: an example gif would be good here

- [Easier to infer types](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/infer-types)

### Powerful Backend Framework

> We've doubled down on the core philosophy of making cross-functional teams more effective and enabling more developers to jump into the backend.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
I don't think this means anything and you already mentioned it

> tRPC 10 creates an seamless experience between the front- and backend that further blurs the line between them

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tRPC 10 creates a seamless experience between the front- and backend that further blurs the line between them
```

> tRPC 10 creates an seamless experience between the front- and backend that further blurs the line between them
> 
> Other ways tRPC 10 provides a powerful backend framework:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
tRPC 10 provides an even more powerful backend framework than before. Building your API has never been easier:
```
the seamless experience between front and backend line does not fit in a section about tRPC's backend capabilities

- [Reusable middlewares](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/middlewares) with [Context Swapping](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/middlewares#context-swapping)
- [Reusable base procedures](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/procedures#reusable-base-publicprocedures) with [multiple input parsers](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/procedures#multiple-input-parsers)
- Flexible [error handling](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/error-handling) with custom [error formatting](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/error-formatting)
- [Procedure metadata](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/metadata) to decorate your procedures with more information

### Growing tRPC Ecosystem

> A rich ecosystem is starting to take form around tRPC. Here are a few examples:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A rich ecosystem is starting to form around tRPC. Here are a few examples:
```

- [create-t3-turbo](https://github.com/t3-oss/create-t3-turbo) to kickstart your next React Native app with tRPC
- [trpc-chrome](https://github.com/jlalmes/trpc-chrome) for building Chrome extensions using tRPC
- There are adapters so you can use tRPC easily in Solid, Svelte, or Vue
- View more examples, plugins, & boilerplates in our [Awesome tRPC collection](https://trpc.io/docs/awesome-trpc)

### Incremental Migration Path

If you want to migrate incrementally, we've also put in a lot of work to make the experience as straightforward as possible for you, with almost full backward compatibility. See the [migration guide](https://trpc.io/docs/v10/migrate-from-v9-to-v10) for a full breakdown.

[Sachin](https://twitter.com/s4chinraja) from the tRPC team has also made [a codemod](https://github.com/sachinraja/trpc-v10-migrate-codemod) that will do much of the heavy lifting for you.

## Thank you!

We're just getting started & we're already busy experimenting with [React Server Components](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/229) & Next.js 13 and planning to do release some amazing tools to work with that very soon.

> A huuuge shoutout goes out to [Sachin](https://twitter.com/s4chinraja), [Julius](https://twitter.com/jullerino), [James](https://twitter.com/jlalmes), [Ahmed](https://twitter.com/ixahmedxii), [Chris](https://twitter.com/trashh_dev), [Theo](https://twitter.com/t3dotgg), [..... TODO].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A huuuge shoutout goes out to [Sachin](https://twitter.com/s4chinraja), [Julius](https://twitter.com/jullerino), [James](https://twitter.com/jlalmes), [Ahmed](https://twitter.com/ixahmedxii), [Chris](https://twitter.com/trashh_dev), [Theo](https://twitter.com/t3dotgg), and [all the contributors who helped make this release possible](https://github.com/trpc/trpc#all-contributors) [..... TODO].
```
